# But ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things. 1 John 2:20

There hath been of old an irreconcilable feud between light and
darkness, between good and evil, and wheresoever truth hath had its
dwelling, there error and falsehood have endeavoured to intrude
themselves; so that no sooner was truth incarnate in the person of our
Lord Jesus, but Antichrist, yea many Antichrists did arise and set
themselves against it; *sed magna fuit veritas & praevalebat*, truth
was great and did prevail.

But when error and falsehood did perceive that truth remained
invulnerable in the person of Christ, they betake themselves to his
posterity, and the seed of the serpent doth conflict and try it out
with the seed of the woman; yet still the victory hath been given on
the saint’s side.

But such was the malice of truth’s great adversary, the prince of
darkness, that he would not only not lay down the chains, but that he
might appear to deserve the name of Apollyon and Abaddon, he hath left
no means unattempted, and hath more curiously sought out and invented
how he might yet (if possible) carry the day against the truth; and to
carry on his undertaking hath projected two ways eminently, whereby
either to banish truth wholly out of the world, or to stop her growth
and progress in the world.

The one hath been by open force and violence, to persecute the persons
of those who have professed themselves to be truth’s subjects; whereby
he might at once make them weary of their profession, and deter and
affright others from entertaining that truth which was thus persecuted
in those that did profess it.

The other way hath been by secret subtlety and cunning sophistry to
undermine and debase the truth, to mix his poison with God’s wine,
whereby he might with less difficulty either cheat the professors, and
owners of it, or at least hinder the genuine and natural effect which
pure truth should have upon the minds of men. But upon all the glory
there hath been a protection and defence, and this defence hath been
the munition of rocks.

First, that there have been violent assaults upon the persons of the
Saints for the truth’s sake, I need not fetch an argument from far to
demonstrate unto you: Every one that we meet withal is able to tell us
of those primitive persecutions, and to relate unto us rueful stories
of the bloody massacres that have been abroad.

Who amongst us is ignorant of those Smithfield Butcheries, and those
whole-burnt-offerings of holy men, which the bloody priests of Rome
did offer to their great idol? What shall we say to this day’s
rehearsal of those not invincible armadas, those powder-plots and
conspiracies, those armies and insurrections, those wars and tumults,
which have threatened as with open mouth, to swallow up and devour
whole nations and commonwealths, where Jesus Christ hath had his
worshippers?

Certainly nothing herein is so wonderful as this, that Christ hath yet
a name in the world, that he hath yet a name in England. And that
which hath secured truth and her subjects from the mischief of these
designs hath been the powerful providence of the Almighty. He that
holdeth the reins of government in his hand, who is the great and
supreme Moderator of this world hath taken to himself his great power,
and hath reigned. Behold, God hath been to his churches, and holy ones
as a refuge from the storm, and as a shadow from the heat of their
persecuting adversaries, whilst the blast of the terrible ones hath
been as a storm against the wall; so that, as we have cause this day,
in our anniversary commemoration of these never to be forgotten
deliverances, we may take up that angelical doxology, and say,
blessing, honour, glory and power, be given to him that sits upon the
throne, and to the Lamb for ever, amen, hallelujah.

Secondly, that there hath been deceit and sophistry used to steal away
truth from the professors of it, nothing is more clear and manifest.
The Scripture speaketh expressly, that there were false prophets
amongst the people, and there shall false teachers creep in, who shall
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them.
And these agents or factors for truth’s adversary, are either those
*tenebriones & lucifugae*, those owls and night birds, who do secretly
blaspheme the truth, but dare not come into the light, lest their
works of darkness should be revealed and made manifest.

Or else they are those whom the Father calls *meridiani daemones*,
those noon-day devils, who with an impudent forehead dare set
themselves to cry down and with most devilish confidence to oppose
that truth which must prevail and conquer. And these may be those
white devils that would appear in the shape of angels of light, whilst
indeed secretly and inwardly they are nothing else but fiends of
darkness. But against all these hath our Lord Jesus secured his church
and people; and hath brought off his truth without loss or prejudice;
and that by the powerful working of his own spirit living in the
hearts of holy men.

Now as we have cause every way to bless God for truth’s safety, so
from a godly jealousy and holy fear we may admonish and call upon the
professors of truth, that they be not led away with the error of the
wicked, or ensnared with the craft and subtlety of Antichristian
seducers; And this was the occasion of that discourse which the
Apostle falls upon in this chapter, as may be gathered from the 26th
verse: These things have I written unto you concerning them that
seduce you. The aged Apostle in the beginning of his discourse doth
well consult the condition of believers to whom this epistle should
come, and writes unto them as unto little children.

In Verse 18, little children, you, whose attainment it is to know the
Father, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him your God
and Father. My little children, it is *hora novissima*, the last hour,
and therefore you had need to stir up your selves, and seriously to
consider, how to save your selves from that great inundation of the
mystery of iniquity, which will endeavour to suppress the mystery of
godliness. My little children, it is the last hour, and as you have
heard formerly by those who instructed you in the truth, that
Antichrist should come, so now already there be many Antichrists, for
this is the last time: And the danger is greater, forasmuch as those
Antichrists who are abroad were sometimes pretenders to the truth of
the Gospel, sometimes they professed themselves subject unto that
truth, which now they endeavour to oppose and vilify. Yet let me
inform you in this, that they went out from us, but they were not of
us, for if they had been of us, no doubt, they would have continued
with us; but they went out, that it might be made manifest they were
not all of us.

Now after he had given this alarm to Believers, concerning the
approach of the Antichristian adversary, He gives himself and them a
cordial and encouragement in the words which I have read, But ye have
an unction from the Holy one, and ye know all things. Which words you
may please to look upon as the saint’s security in evil times, or the
best protection of holy men against the impudent assaults of brazen-
faced error, and Antichristian falsehood. In these words be pleased to
observe these three things. First, A glorious title given to Jesus
Christ, the King of Saints. He is called the Holy One. You have an
anointing from the Holy One.

The spirits of Antichrist are unclean spirits, they are profane,
debauched, polluted, and polluting spirits, but the spirit of our Lord
Jesus, which is in you, proceedeth from one that is holy, harmless,
and separated from sinners. This is a title often given in the Old
Testament to the eternal Majesty, that uncreated Being, God himself:
And our Lord Jesus, as the eternal Son of the everlasting Father, is
dignified with the same title, and called the Holy child, the Holy
thing, the Holy One; yea, in Daniel 9:24 he is called the *sanctum
sanctorum*, the great Saint, or the most holy of all. There the Angel
tells Daniel that after seventy weeks there should be a reconciliation
made for iniquity, and everlasting righteousness brought in, and the
most holy should be anointed: that is, our Lord Jesus Christ, the true
Messiah, should come in the flesh and be inaugurated, and installed
into that great office of an High Priest, which had been for so many
years past typified and shadowed out in their priest that served in
the temple.

Now this is worth our consideration, that if our Lord Jesus, who is
the fountain from whence we receive this spirit be so holy and pure,
then surely the effects and operations that this spirit doth produce
in those who receive it, must be holy and pure also. Impurity,
uncleanness, and sinful defilements cannot possibly proceed from so
pure a spirit as the spirit of Jesus Christ is, whose name is, the
Holy One. Secondly, Another thing considerable in the words is, an
effusion of the Holy Ghost from Jesus Christ upon his people. Ye have
an unction, or ye have received the anointing. The custom of anointing
was anciently used either to separate and consecrate to an holy use,
or to install and inaugurate to some office and service, or to endow
with gifts suitable to some notable and eminent employment, and we
find in the Scriptures that the anointing passed upon some of their
Prophets, their Priests, and their Kings.

It is also further observed, that in the second temple, the anointing,
or the holy ointment was wanting, which might signify to the Jews that
then were, that their ceremonial rites were beginning to waste, they
should therefore long for, and earnestly desire the Messiah’s coming,
by whom that anointing and other things should be supplied and
restored in a more singular and eminent way. Our Lord Jesus as our
High Priest was anointed; and from him do all his people as so many
inferior priests, receive and participate of that anointing: for as it
is observed, the High Priest of old had most oil poured upon his head,
and the other priests were but sprinkled with that holy oil. So then
the meaning of this anointing which is poured out from Christ upon his
people must needs signify a communication of the same spirit, of the
same life, of the same grace and nature, that Jesus Christ, as the
Chief Priest, was anointed withal from the Father: so that the same
disposition and goodness of mind doth flow out from Christ to a
gracious soul.

Thirdly, Here is the great benefit that Believers do receive by this
holy anointing, which they have from the Holy One, and that is, That
they know all things. You have an unction from the holy one, and ye
know all things. There is some difference in the reading of these
words; the Syriac translator reads them thus, ye know all men; and in
that sense they may refer to that which the Apostle Paul speaks of in
1 Corinthians 12:10, where, amongst the gifts of the spirit, which he
reckoneth up, this is one, namely the discerning of spirits. And the
truth is, this great gift of discerning men’s spirits was more
especially given to some than unto others in the primitive times, and
they were able not only probably to conjecture, but also to give a
judgement concerning many with whom they conversed, and did thereby
discover divers hollow and false-hearted hypocrites: which gift may,
peradventure, though in a smaller measure and lower degree, live even
to this day in the hearts of holy men; for verily, they many times do
give a very shrewd conjecture, not to say judgement, concerning
professors amongst whom they live; but this they do with a sober,
modest and compassionate spirit.

As for profane monsters, and notorious sinners, their condition is
obvious, and easily to be discerned, by men whose eyes are in their
heads, who are not blinded with a bride of favour, or prejudiced with
some fond and passionate affection. But all the Greek copies, as is
observed, do read the words as we translate them. Ye know all things;
that is, all those main, necessary, and fundamental truths, which
Jesus Christ came to declare, as from the Father to the world; or ye
know all things, that is, all those truths of the gospel which those
Antichrists that now are, or that great Antichrist which shall come,
will set themselves to oppose and contradict. You, who have this
anointing do most certainly and assuredly know, and are well
established in these principal and capital truths which you have
received by virtue of this anointing.

Thus we have a brief account of these words presented to us: And the
point that I shall discourse upon, with your Christian patience is
this. That the most certain and assured knowledge of Christian
doctrine is attained unto by a participation of the anointing of Jesus
Christ. Ye have received such an unction, and thereby it is that ye
know all things. Every man almost, in these days, thinks himself well
instructed in his profession that he makes, and in the Articles of
Faith whereunto he declareth himself to be a servant: who is there
that doth not judge himself to be as a master of Israel; well
understood in all points of theology, who yet, like Nicodemus,
remaineth in the very darkness of ignorance, as not knowing what
regeneration and the new birth might signify: for we shall find that
there is no such certain and infallible way to come to the knowledge
of heavenly truths, as by receiving an unction from Jesus Christ.

When Job’s three friends had spent much time in arguing and rearguing
the case with Job, Elihu standeth up and speaketh after this manner. I
did expect that days should have taught wisdom, and that I should have
found understanding in the multitude of years, but now I find, there
is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth him
understanding; great men are not always wise, neither do the aged
understand judgement; I find a great difference between the judgement
that these men, though grave seniors, give concerning Job’s case, and
the judgement that the spirit of God giveth: the censure of these men
proceedeth from the peevish, angry spirits of men, but the judgement
of the divine Spirit in this case is according to truth.

But that notable Scripture which I shall briefly speak unto is in 1
Corinthians 2:13-14.

# Which things also we speak, not in the words which man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing spiritual things with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1 Corinthians 2:13-14

Here the Apostle speaking of this very subject, telleth us of many
things: That which is the *substratum*, the main business of his
discourse, are the things of the spirit; then he tells us of a natural
man and a spiritual man; then he speaks of the spirit of the world,
the spirit of God, and the mind of Christ; and then he compares all
these together, and bringeth forth thus much, namely, That the spirit
of the world, the spirit of a natural man, which is a mundane, worldly
spirit, cannot receive the things of the spirit of God, for they are
spiritually discerned, and only they can know them, who have the same
spirit living and dwelling in their souls, which Jesus Christ had
dwelling in him having received it from the Father; We have the mind,
and spirit of God, and hereby do we know the things of the Spirit.
That I may the more clearly manifest, to this great Assembly, what my
understanding is in this weighty matter, give me leave to preface four
particulars, which may prevent mistakes, as if any private or
particular design were aimed at in such a doctrine as this.

First, man as a reasonable creature is the subject of Christian
doctrine. Man doth not throw away his mind and understanding when he
comes to be proselyted into the truths of Christ. When God undertaketh
to inform a man with heavenly doctrine, he doth not deal with him as
he would deal with a stone which he would raise up to be a child to
Abraham, for he findeth man already endowed with a mind and will, upon
which account he is capable to hear further from his God. Man’s
understanding is of very good use in Christian Religion; for by that
is man able to communicate much of his sense in heavenly things unto
others, as also to plead for, and by argument to back the truth
received, against the cavils and contradictions of such as oppose
themselves.

I must confess freely what I apprehend, that, in the moment of a man’s
conversion, when the grace of God powerfully seizes upon his spirit to
turn him from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God,
those acts that he doth then perform, are the most rational acts that
ever he did perform in all his life. The acts of repentance, faith and
self-denial, the act of turning from sin unto God, which are the acts
that appear in the first motion of the soul unto God, these are in
themselves and to the soul, most reasonable, equitable, just and
right; yea, in the further progress of the grace of God in man’s mind,
when it grows up into sanctification and holiness, the understanding
of a man doth act and acteth understandingly. The truth is, this mind
and understanding of a man is, as the great philosopher calls it, the
very flower of a man’s soul, which is not blasted and withered by the
truths of the Gospel, but it is thereby reformed, rectified, repaired
and restored to its youthful perfection, with great advantage. So that
I think, in a sober sense, what the Apostle speaks of the Law, that it
is, a school-master to Christ, may be said of man’s natural knowledge,
and understanding: in which sense one of the ancients calleth true
philosophy, an inferior school, or a fore-teaching to Christ, as it is
that which renders a man capable and fit to receive the impressions of
a divine spirit: for certainly a man in his wits, and not a mad,
distracted man, is the subject of God’s grace, of his converting and
sanctifying grace.

Secondly, The written word of God, in the Scriptures of Truth, is the
only outward rule of faith and manners. This is the *norma fidei &
morum*; According to this rule must every man order his conversation,
Isaiah 8:20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because they have not so much as
morning-light in them. This is the royal standard of truth, unto which
we must bring all men’s dogmata, their assertions, and opinions, which
are vended for truth in the world. Hereby may we examine, and judge of
all that, which men would obtrude upon us. I recommend, to every one
that hears me, the constant studying of the holy Scriptures, as being
the oracles of God. It was that, for which, the Holy Ghost doth so
highly commend the Beraean Christians, That they received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether
those things were so; and upon this account they were called more
noble, as being better born, better bred; better educated then those
of Thessalonica. I will only add this, that the letter of the
Scriptures is but dead without a divine power joined with it, and a
spirit, moving man’s mind, without a word, is very questionable and
dangerous.

Thirdly, The Holy Spirit, which is understood by this anointing, is no
private spirit, or particular impulse, no singular persuasion or
extraordinary inspiration, but a general and universal sense in all
regenerate minds. Holy men do all agree, by common consent, in those
truths, which the new creature doth chiefly resent and relish.

The Apostle to this purpose useth two expressions in 1 Corinthians
12:13 and 2 Corinthians 4:13. By one spirit are we all baptized into
one body, and have been all made to drink into one spirit: and we have
he same spirit of faith. Where the Apostle considers the community of
Christians, under the notion of a body made up of several members,
which must have a soul and spirit to inform, animate, quicken and
enliven it. This is that spirit of Jesus Christ which doth live in the
souls of holy men; and distinguish them from the common herd of
infidels and beastly sinners.

Although we may be ignorant of that which the philosophers meant by
their *anima mundi*; the soul of the world, yet methinks every
gracious heart should easily apprehend what is that spirit and soul of
the regenerate world. But here I must acknowledge also, that the
eternal spirit of God doth sometimes come down as from heaven, and
particularly move upon a regenerate mind, whereby it doth blow off the
ashes and stir up those heavenly sparks, which lay in the soul as
buried under some clouds of sadness, and hereby the frozen and
benumined spirit of a precious saint doth find itself thawed into a
vivacious fitness for any service.

This is that which the spouse calls for in Song of Solomon 4:16. Awake
O north wind, and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out. This discourse, I conceive, may shew us
the difference between the good spirit of God, which sober minds
converse withal, and that fanatic and ecstatic spirit, which vain men
pretend unto, and are deluded with. This spirit, in both the senses
that we have spoken of may not be condemned as a groundless
enthusiasm, for as the learned Cameron observes, *Enthusiasmus est,
ubi quis est merum organum, sine omni usurationis & judicij*. Then is
a man acted by such a spirit, when he uttereth revelations without the
use of his understanding and reason, as sometimes the prophets of old
did, who were but as a trunk or instrument through which the spirit
conveyed those secrets, which God would declare unto the world.

Fourthly, The spirit of Christ signified by this anointing, is first
received in the way of his ordinances, and is thereby maintained and
carried on, and doth live with great delight in the use of those
ordinances where it was first received. He who hath received the
anointing from the Holy One, knows where he hath received it, and he
knows also, that the same spirit can breath no where so freely, as in
such holy air. The new creature was born under the ordinances of the
Gospel, and is nursed and brought up under them. Faith came first by
hearing, and faith groweth and receiveth strength, being nourished by
the same doctrine, by which it was at first planted. They who have
heard and learned of the Father come unto Christ, and know not whether
to go from him, because he hath the words of eternal life.

The Apostle in 2 Corinthians 3:8 calleth the ministration of the
Gospel the ministration of the spirit, as being that by which the soul
doth receive, and grow up in this divine and heavenly life. Therefore
the author of 1 John, writing to anointed ones, tells them that as
they had heard so it should be that Antichrist would come, and that
they should abide in the truth; whereby he doth commend them and their
teachers for their great care and diligence in searching out and
receiving the truth. I need not spend time in shewing the lawfulness,
conveniency, and necessity of gospel ordinances, such as are, hearing
the word, prayer, breaking of bread, to shew forth the Lord’s death,
and the rest which are of the like institution.

Only this I would speak by way of admonition, as it is a serious and
general observation which holy men have made, that no sooner do men
cast off the use of the ordinances and appointments of Jesus Christ,
but at the same time they do cast off God and godliness, and laying
the reins upon their own necks, they set the foot upon the holy Law,
running desperately upon further mischief. Thus hath divine justice
branded those who would not humbly submit to such sacred Institutions.
Such is the majesty and authority of these things, that almost every
man in the use of them doth find an awe upon his conscience, and feel
himself commanded into a moderate and sober modesty, a modest sobriety
and moderation.

# The Doctrine Opened

Having thus laid down these four particulars by way of prevention,
give me leave to explain the sense of the doctrine in these seven
following propositions. First, The Lord Jesus as head of his Church
was first anointed with the divine spirit. Here began this holy
unction; Jesus Christ was the first receiver of the Spirit. The
eternal spirit poured forth an abundance of this ointment upon the
person of our Lord Jesus, he was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows. In the ancient anointings, God had appointed
certain measures of this oil to be spent upon the persons anointed.
Saul was anointed with a cruise of oil, as not like to continue in the
throne long; David was anointed with a horn of oil, his kingdom being
to remain longer.

But it pleased the Father that in Jesus Christ should all fulness
dwell, so that in Isaiah 10 he is called the anointing; and such is
the savour of his good ointments that his name is as ointment poured
forth, therefore do the virgins love him. The Lord Jesus did receive
this fulness for our sakes, that from it we might receive, and grace
for grace. He was to be the head of his Church, *propter eminentiam &
influentiam*, not only for superiority, but also for influence and
conveyance, so that upon this account he was first considered in the
business of anointing, that he might be useful for conveyance of this
spirit to his people. The ointment poured upon the head of the high
priest ran down upon his beard, and to the skirts of his clothing,
leaving a sweet fragrance and savour behind it: so doth this spirit of
our Lord Jesus, flow from him, down to all his saints, and perfumes
them with his own sweetness. And as the prophet Elijah, when he went
to heaven, let his mantle and spirit fall upon Elisha: so did our
blessed Lord and Saviour, after his ascension, send forth his own
spirit to dwell with his disciples, as their solace, and comfort, in
his necessary absence.

Secondly, Jesus Christ as a second Adam doth beget children after his
own image. The first Adam brought forth children in his own likeness,
deriving to them the same natural spirit which was in himself: so doth
the second Adam propagate his posterity, and give unto them his own
spirit which is supernatural and heavenly. The picture doth not so
exactly resemble the face, as the regenerate soul doth resemble her
everlasting Father.

This notion lieth very obvious in the 5th chapter of the epistle to
the Romans. Where the Apostle discourseth of the two Adams and their
two posterities, with their several advantages, or prejudices that
they received from their head: As by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and death passed upon all, for as much as all
have sinned: which words refer to the whole posterity of the first
Adam: so by one man came life, by one came forgiveness, by one came
such a universal reparation; that as in Adam all died, so in Christ
all are made alive; all the posterity of the second Adam are as much,
yea more advantaged by their Head Jesus Christ; then all the posterity
of the first Adam were damnified by his apostacy, and the influence
that it had upon them. The Lord Jesus finds the children of the first
Adam in their natural capacity, and maketh them the subjects of his
grace, but he bringeth forth upon their minds and spirits a new
creation, which he did not find in them, no not *in semine*, not in
the seeds or root of it. He cometh by his spirit to do some thing in
man, which could not be done by the sublimation or improvement of
those *rudera naturae*, those relics and remainders of shipwrecked
nature.

For if so, then what meaneth that bitter cup, what meant that pomp of
bloody sufferings, which Jesus Christ did undergo? What need was there
that he should come endowed with so much spirit? If natural
principles, which yet remain in the broken posterity of the first
Adam, could have brought forth that which now is the great design and
undertaking of Christ in the world. He seemeth to have come in the
flesh, and to have suffered such contradiction of sinners, and so
shameful, accursed death upon the cross upon too small and too
inferior account. Doth Jesus Christ, after all this, effect no more
upon men, than what the scattered pieces of decayed nature being
gathered together, could effect upon them? Surely, Brethren, he doth
more than so, for he begets children unto himself as a Father, and
uniteth members unto himself as an Head, he transplanteth souls into
an other soil, and they live in him, deriving sap and spirit from him
as from their better soil, their new root.

The Apostle in Galatians 4 doth thus express it: My little children,
with whom I travail in birth, until Christ be formed in you; that is,
until the spirit of our Lord Jesus comes to be that to your souls,
which your souls are unto your bodies. The reasonable soul in man is
the principle of life, and that by which he is denominated to be a
man, and distinguished from a beast, so doth the spirit of Christ
working it self into the soul of man, transform him into his own
image, and this new creature hath the same spirit, nature and
disposition with Jesus Christ, whereby he is denominated a Christian,
and distinguished from other men.

The person of Jesus Christ was that original copy, according to which
all his posterity should be made conformable. This is that which the
Apostle speaks to in 1 Corinthians 15, where he saith, as we have born
the image of the earthly, so must we bear the image of the heavenly
Adam; which is not only to be understood in a corporeal sense, that
our bodies in the resurrection shall be called out of their dust into
the likeness of Christ’s glorified body, but in a spiritual sense
also, for our minds and souls having received the first fruits of the
resurrection within themselves already, they also shall in union with
their bodies rise up in a complete similitude and likeness to our Lord
Jesus, having limb for limb, grace for grace.

Thirdly, The spirit and life of Christ communicated to his people,
doth make them capable and able to understand his will. When the
spirit of regeneration is past upon the soul, then doth a man become
fit to understand heavenly truths. It is true, there is a kind of
rational assent to heavenly truths before conversion, and the natural
man doth understand the letter of the spirit, but not the spirit of
the letter; yet no man hath so clear, so full and undoubted
understanding of those things as he whose mind is purged from the
dregs of worldly lusts, which are like a fog and mist upon the face of
the soul.

The souls of men are like so many glasses, which reflect the image of
things presented before them, now if there be a steam breathed upon
the glass, the reflection is very little, or none at all; or if the
light, which should convey the species from the object to the glass,
be but a dim twilight, a weak and insufficient light, there is no
reflection neither; so it is with the souls of men, whilst our worldly
affections, and adulterate love to sin and wickedness, do boil and
bubble up within us, sending up their steams into our minds, the
things of God cannot be seen, according to the greatness of that
beauty and excellency which is upon them. He that caused the light to
shine out of darkness, must shine in our hearts, to give that light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; for as
the Psalmist speaks: *in tuo lumine lumen videbimus*, in thy light we
shall see light.

The holy nature of Jesus Christ is the true collyrium, the true eye-
salve, whereby the soul must be cured of its blindness; and the
Apostle speaks in Colossians 3:10 of putting on the new man, which is
renewed into knowledge, according to the image of him that created
him. Until we be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and taken off
from the love of this world, and the things thereof, we cannot attain
to a right New Testament knowledge of those things, which Christ hath
revealed from the bosom of the Father. There is a *praeputium cordis*,
a foreskin of the heart, a pride and insolency of the natural spirit,
which must be circumcised and destroyed, before the soul can attain
unto a full view of that excellent and glorious truth, which Jesus
Christ doth present us withal.

Fourthly, The knowledge of Christian doctrine grounded only upon
argument is but doubtful and uncertain knowledge. I conceive, that
syllogisms and arguments are only for this world, and the things of
this world, but not for the things of God and of the other world. The
natural philosopher attains to his natural knowledge by observations
and experiments in several particulars, by antecedents and
consequents, and most of his knowledge in those things is very feeble,
crazy and questionable, which made that great philosopher after all
his inquiry for knowledge, profess, that he only attained to this:
that he knew himself to be ignorant, *hoc tantum scio quod nihil
scio*, this only do I know, that I know nothing. But God hath ordained
a better way to convey his truth into our hearts, and that is by a
renovation of our minds, and by the communication of a divine nature.
God hath not left his people at uncertainties in those things which
are material and necessary, but hath given them more than the
certainty of a demonstration.

Whatsoever I do receive for truth upon the account of argumentative
conclusions, that I am bound to lay aside and disown for error upon
the like account, when a more probable argument comes. And truly
friends, if all the ground of our entertaining Christ and truth, or
Christian doctrine, be because such an argument conveyed it unto us,
what shall become of us and the truth, when we meet with a subtle
sophister and Antichristian head, who shall frame an argument against
the truth, unanswerable by our logic? Where shall a man ever consist,
if he must live upon these terms in the world? Besides, every one to
whom the gospel of Christ is preached, hath not an head strong enough
to grapple with the bigness and depth of some kind of arguments, who
yet may have their hearts truly mortified to this world, and carried
out in love to the person and nature of our Lord Jesus.

The ground of that ancient scepticism, and that of the academics,
whereby they did assert that nothing could be comprehended, might be
this: all their knowledge was derived unto them by probable
conclusions, so that no thing was certainly and eternally true and
infallible, but conjectural and probable only, and to be entertained
according to the retinue and pomp of well dressed arguments. He that
is but an argumentative Christian, is rather a skeptic, than a true
Christian. He is a Christian at the greatest uncertainty in the world.
I must confess, many notions which are obtruded upon men as
orthodoxal, and contended for by others as principal pieces of
theology, must be soberly examined by Scripture and reason, for they
are not *per senota*, they are not seen by their own light, and in
such opinions, modesty and sobriety are highly commendable. Yea, I
confess further, that the heavenly principles of the New Creature may
be backed and strengthened by rational arguments, and many times, the
soul is constrained by a practical syllogism to be less disquieted
within it self; but yet, the most clear evidence, and assurance of the
truth and goodness in these holy things of Christ and the new
creature, ariseth out of themselves, as light floweth from the body of
the sun, without the contusion or compulsion of an harsh argument.
Yea, and a regenerate heart doth by an holy sympathy, entertain with
infinite delight these precious and holy truths.

Arguments and syllogisms do make a great noise in the world; me think,
they are not unlike to that appearance in Horeb unto the Prophet
Elijah, when the great and strong wind rept the mountains, and brake
in pieces the rocks, but it is said, the Lord was not in the wind, nor
in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but he was in the still, small
voice. *Lux spiritus sancti est lenis lux, perfundens se mentibus*.
The Holy spirit doth gently hover over the soul, and brood upon it,
Heavenly doctrine falleth down upon the spirits of men, not like a
mighty violent rain, but like a shower of oil, like a sweet honey-dew.

Fifthly, The inward sense of a regenerate mind, doth easily judge
between Christ and Antichrist. Such holy souls are well resolved about
the things of God, they do not halt between God and Baal, arguing
themselves out of all religion and modesty, but they have a natural
tendency towards these things, and they feel a magnetic virtue
secretly over-power them. This is the natural working of the new
creature, whereby the soul doth inwardly savour and relish, difference
and distinguish between the doctrines of Christ, and the impostures of
Antichrist. Jesus Christ tells us in John 10 that his sheep do hear
his voice; but they will not follow a stranger, for they know not the
voice of strangers. Whereby he would have us to understand, that all
his disciples, who are truly taught of him, do carry within themselves
the *lapis lydius*, the touch-stone of truth, and such is the present
touch or taste that some things do make upon their spirits, that they
do easily discern from whence they come, although they do not bring
them to an external judicatory.

The divine nature whereof we are made partakers, doth put a difference
between that which is really and truly heavenly, and that which is
only counterfeit stuff, as the touchstone doth between gold and
copper. It is worthy of our observation, that every life doth attract
and concoct that which is suitable to its nature, and the most
inferior life hath such a faculty. The plants of the earth do draw
unto themselves that sap and juice which is proper for them, and do
digest it into nourishment; The beasts of the field do naturally move
towards those things which will maintain their lives, and turn aside
from that which is poisonous and destructive to them, and what is by
them received, they turn *in succum and sanguinem*, into food and
nourishment, and do grow thereby.

The rational life in a natural man doth by observation, argument, and
dispute, gather up natural truths, whereby the man becomes well
polished in his understanding, and may deserve the name of an
instructed philosopher, so doth that spiritual and heavenly life,
which we call the new creature, and divine nature in a Christian. It,
being indued with such an attractive and digestive faculty, doth know
what is suitable or unsuitable to it self, and doth accordingly affect
or dis-relish it. The needle touched with a loadstone doth not more
naturally move towards the pole, then a soul touched with a divine
spirit, doth move towards and freely embrace the truths of Christ. It
cannot rest at any point in the compass until it be centered there.

Men in whom the spirit of this world lives, and is predominant, do
naturally affect worldly things, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of
the eye, and the pride of life. He that loveth profit, is wholly taken
up in getting wealth. He that loveth honour and popular applause, doth
set himself to please men. He that loveth pleasures, studieth excess,
riot, wantonness, and dalliance, and all these do find their spirits
move with a kind of naturalness towards such things, and take
wonderful contentment in them, so that as the Apostle speaks, These
men are lovers of pleasure, lovers of money, rather then lovers of
God. The spirit of Jesus Christ, in the hearts of holy men, doth, with
savour and relish, entertain the things of God, whilst other men that
have but common spirits, cannot take any delight or complacency in
them. Such was the hearty and sincere affection of Timothy towards the
Philippians, that Saint Paul saith, there was none like him, who did,
naturally take care of their affairs. And it is much more true of a
regenerate heart; for none attain to such a discretion in heavenly
truths as it self attaineth unto, for unto a man void of such a life,
those precious truths are like the white of an egg, without any
savour.

Sixthly, The true knowledge of heavenly things increaseth according to
the measure of sanctification. I do not speak of knowledge falsely so
called, as the Apostle some where terms it, but of true knowledge,
that is, inward, experimental understanding, and this grows up as
holiness doth enlarge it self in the soul. The clearer the glass, the
more perfect is the reflection that it makes. The more pure and
spotless the soul is, the better doth it receive and judge of heavenly
things. If it be but day-break, or a dim and dusky twilight, we have a
more doubtful appearance of things that are before us: but if it grows
to a morning-light, and once increaseth into a noon-day brightness,
then have we a more exact and judicious vision of them. When the soul
begins at first to turn unto God, it hath some taste or smattering of
these spiritual dainties, and it is like that taste, which new-born
babes have of the milk which they suck from the breasts, but when the
Christian follows on to know the Lord, whose going forth is prepared
as the morning, and when he doth resolvedly and strongly carry on the
work of sanctification in his heart and life, then doth he come to a
more mature and ripened judgement of these things; He was a child
before, but now he is grown up to a strong man in Christ. The great
Apostle tells us, when he was a child, he thought as a child. He
understood as a child, but when he became a man, he put away childish
things. His apprehensions of truth were but low and weak, because his
capacity was not great, but now he looks upon the brighter face of
truth with greater complacency then he did before.

Our Lord Jesus tells us in John 7:17, if any man will do his will, he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God. The best way to know
assuredly and impregnably the truth of those things which God speaketh
in his word, is to observe and obey those things which God enjoins.
The Holy Ghost, which is the best witness of Jesus Christ and his
doctrine, is given to them that obey him, Acts 5:32, and these men do
sweetly rest in an assurance of the truth, whilst others who are of
impure spirits do quarrel and snarl against it.

He that would grow in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, let him grow in grace, as the Apostle exhorts in 2 Peter 3:18.
One that is newly entered into the School of Christ, doth find it a
hard and difficult task, to subdue every corruption. The sins of
education, custom, and natural tendency, are not easily mastered.
Hence it comes to pass, that upon any laps, or fall into any
particular sin, the soul begins to be haunted with scrupulosities,
doubts, and fears. Yea, it doth upon such occasions fall to question
the truth of grace, and the certainty of the gospel, whereas, in case
of a constant and close walking with God, there be no such clouds
arising, but a constant serenity upon the face of the soul.

The truth is, all those secret suspicions, and jealousies concerning
the certainty of the ways of Christ, or of the work of his grace upon
our hearts, do proceed from some guilt contracted by acts of violence
against the light and principles of the new creature. Would you then
be perfect in and assured of the truths of the gospel, take the
Apostle’s counsel, put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ and make no
provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof.

Seventhly, The holy anointing in a regenerate soul will remain without
pollution by Antichristian falsehood. This anointing which ye have
received abideth in you, and as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in
him; so saith our Apostle in 1 John 2:27, as also Paul, in 2
Corinthians 1:21, shews the ground of a soul’s establishment in the
truth to be this holy unction, this participation of the divine nature
from God. He that establisheth us with you in Christ, and hath
anointed us, is God. Such a soul can do nothing against the truth, but
for the truth.

They who are persuaded into an orthodox opinion, or article of faith,
by an human argument, may again be easily cheated of that opinion by
that that dice-play of men, when some cunning antagonist shall cog an
argument which may seem to import a fairer probability. But he, that
hath this inward light of the life of Christ, as his guide into the
knowledge of holy things, is not easily removed from the truth, or
much affrighted with the terror of arguments, but shall hold his own
for ever.

Children and fools may exchange their gold for counters, but the wise
man’s eyes are in his head, and he will not part with his most
precious faith upon such easy terms. This true knowledge of God, and
spirit of Christ in the soul, is that immortal seed, that eternal
life, which shall never die. He that hath said, touch not mine
anointed, will suffer none to lay violent hands upon his tender
offspring; and in case of any impudent assault or bold affront offered
to his sacred image, it shall appear that he who is in a renewed mind
is greater then he that is in the world. This holy anointing, this new
creation in the soul, is a principle of recovery in case of some
particular apostacy, and may be signified by that voice behind one,
which the prophet Isaiah speaks of, which shall say, this is the way,
walk in it, when he turneth to the right hand, and when he turneth to
the left.

Suppose a man having received this anointing, should, at any time, by
a sudden temptation, defile himself with sin, whereby his glory is
stained, his spirit disquieted, his conscience wounded, and his peace
interrupted, he shall find such secret struggling and strivings within
himself, that he is never quiet until his filthiness be washed off,
and the new creature within him restored to former freedom.

Upon this account the spirit of Christ is an holy unction; for as oil
will not easily mix with other liquors, or incorporate with other
bodies, so this divine spirit will preserve it self pure, and hate the
very garment spotted with the flesh. An holy soul is like a fountain,
or well spring of water, into which there may be thrown dirt and
trash, but the fountain will still be cleansing itself, and purging
out that filth which was cast into it. The spirit of Jesus Christ
dwelling thus in the soul will continually be working out of all
darkness, and leading it on from light to light.

Thus have we opened the doctrine unto you, and made it manifest, That
the most certain knowledge of heavenly truths, ariseth from the
anointing of Christ’s spirit within the soul, and not from outward
arguments. The spirit of God doth convey these truths into the soul,
the new creature doth resent them, and this anointing doth establish
the soul in a certain assurance of them.

# The Doctrine Applied

Now by way of application, give me leave to speak briefly to some few
corollaries or deductions which flow naturally from this notion which
hath been thus explained.

First, If the new creature brought forth in the soul, by the spirit of
regeneration, be that which teacheth the certain knowledge of
Christian doctrine, then here we may see what is the true meaning of
that spirit of Christ, which he hath so universally promised to bestow
upon his people. The Old and New Testament is full of promises in this
kind. All thy people shall be taught of God. A new heart will I give
you, and a new spirit will I put within you, I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes. I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, I will put my laws into their mind,
and write them upon their hearts, and they shall not teach every man
his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, as if
they were ignorant of him, or unacquainted with him, for they shall
all know me, from the least to the greatest, and this spirit, which I
will pour out upon my servants, and mine handmaids, shall lead them
into all truth.

Now all these, and the like glorious promises, do signify unto us that
experimental knowledge of God and truth, which is the proper effect of
this renovation of mind which hath been set before us. When the soul
is born again of that incorruptible seed, and transplanted into our
Lord Jesus, as into a new root, partaking of his sap and spirit, then
doth it attain to a more clear understanding of the will of God, and
hath a more perfect savour, and relish of Christ and his ways. This
holy Spirit is that true *shechenah*, that indwelling of God in the
soul, which was anciently shadowed out by that cloud of presence,
which sat between the cherubim’s wings in Solomon’s temple.

Then are we indeed taught of God, when this spirit dwells within us.
Then are we under the fulfilling of these promises, when we have
received the truth, not as it comes from Paul, or as it is delivered
by Apollo, but the truth as it is in Jesus; when the spirit of truth
doth make us to know not the word, but the power of it, implanting the
mind of Christ in our minds, and turning of us from the ways of sin,
into the love of God. I do not here determine what those larger
measures, or higher degrees of this teaching may be, in the latter
days, when the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth, as the
waters do the sea.

Secondly, If the best way to a certainty of knowledge in heavenly
things be by a spiritual anointing, then proud man must be humbled and
be willing to be taught by a divine spirit. Flesh and blood cannot
reveal unto man the things of the spirit, neither can any man call
Jesus the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, for the flesh profiteth
nothing, it is the spirit that quickeneth, and these things they are
spirit, and they are life. All things that Jesus Christ spake, and
did, they were spoken in parables, and done in parables to those that
are without; that hearing they might hear and not understand, and
seeing they might see and not perceive: but to his disciples he saith,
unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom, unto you
these things are revealed from the Father. The Apostle tells us in 2
Corinthians 10:5 that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulling down of those strong holds, and
reasonings, those insulting notions that lift up themselves against
Jesus Christ. After all the inquisition that our carnal reason can
make into the scriptures of truth, to find out articles of faith: we
shall still remain unsatisfied, and may perceive that we are still
ready secretly to ask the same question that Pilate did, what is
truth? Many men do sometimes think that they throughly understand
spiritual truths, when, alas! All their knowledge amounteth to nothing
more, than a zealous or passionate arguing for them.

The whole Bible to a reasonable man, not regenerated, will be, as that
book was which thepProphet speaks of when it was delivered to the
learned to read it, he returns it, and saith, I cannot, for it is
sealed; and when it was delivered into the hands of the unlearned to
read it, he saith, I am not learned. We carry Bibles in our hands; and
say, we study the word of God, we do well, but until we have a spirit
from God teaching of us inwardly, and reforming us according to the
tenor of that word, we shall be no great proficients in that
knowledge. Hence it is that in the 19th verse of the epistle of Jude,
one that hath not the spirit, and one that is sensual, are accounted
to be the same person, sensual, not having the spirit. The truth is,
vain man would be wise, though he be like a wild asses colt. Men would
not only be masters of reason, and natural knowledge, but would also
have dominion over other men’s faith, and would subdue the spiritual
sense of the new creature to the sovereignty and supremacy of human
arguments.

But as the Apostle speaks, where is the wise? where is the disputer of
this world? hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? These
men indeed, be those that would seem to be wise; but is it not with
them as the Apostle speaks in Romans 1:21? Are they not become dark,
and vain in their imaginations? Yea, do they not *cum ratione
insanire*, even run mad with that, which they call their reason,
though it be nothing better than a corrupt enmity against the honesty
and simplicity of Christ? Give me leave to speak freely in this point;
when the great mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, such are self-
denial, reliance upon the grace of God revealed by the Messiah, living
by faith in another, and deriving strength from Christ through a
promise; I say, when these things and the like are propounded to a
natural understanding, and an unmortified heart, will it not say, that
you do *lapides loqui*, speak stones unto it, and offer that which is
too hard to be received?

Methinks, when I offer such spiritual truths to be judged at the
tribunal of natural understanding, which I call argumentative
knowledge, it is as when that which belongeth to one sense, is
presented to an other, which cannot give a perfect judgement of it. He
that would make me to understand what music is, and the excellency of
it, must not bring me to one that can with eloquence relate a story
thereof, and tell me in words, what ravishing harmony, and rare
delights it doth entertain one withal, and then bid me imagine how
every note exceeded the other; for this is not to touch upon the right
string, but he must bring me to a concert, where mine ear may receive
a true impression from such musical delights.

It is not enough to paint out the beauty of a rose in the most lively
colours, and set it before mine eyes, but I must smell to the rose it
self, and thereby come to know the sweetness of it. We may think to
make our selves great doctors of the Law by a form of knowledge, but
thereby we deceive our selves, attaining only to a poor and beggarly
understanding of the truths therein contained; for the best way to
know them, is to obey and practise them. He that hath his heart truly
mortified to this world, and is crucified with Christ, being made
alive again by that spirit of regeneration, he alone, doth attain to
the most quick and lively apprehensions of those truths, that are
revealed by Christ in his gospel.

Thirdly, if they alone do truly know the things of Christ, who have
received his anointing, then certainly, wicked men are no competent
judges of Christian doctrine. Whatsoever their parts are, or their
acquired learning in arts and sciences, yet, as to heavenly things,
they are very dark and ignorant. Perhaps, this inference, may provoke
the great wits of the world, to say as those Pharisees did to Christ,
are we blind also? But I am sure the Apostle tells us, He that hath
not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, and he that is not one of
Christ’s flock, I do not know how he should understand Christ’s voice.
The profaning Jews had the *magnalia legis*, the great things of the
law delivered to them, and they accounted them as a strange thing;
for, as the Apostle speaks, Moses hath a veil lying upon his face, and
when that people shall be converted unto the Lord, this veil shall be
taken away. There is the flesh of Christ covering his spirit, there is
the letter and shell of the word of Christ as it is printed in our
Bibles, which doth, like a mask, cloud and hide the beautiful face of
truth, so that a carnal heart cannot discern the beauty, or judge
aright of the excellency thereof, so that the preaching of Christ
crucified is an offence to the Jew, and to the Greeks foolishness; but
unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, it is the power of
God, and the wisdom of God.

Great men are not always wise men, and the men of the world are not
fit to advise withal in the things of God. Some there be whom God hath
given up to a reprobate mind, to an injudicious mind, which hath no
true judgement in heavenly things. Would any one make a mad man his
counsellor? No, he would choose one that is *compos mentis*, one that
is of a sober and discreet reason, and advise with him in a matter of
difficulty. He that is of a ranting spirit, and given to the love of
fleshly pleasures, may *verba conari*, may, like a parrot, speak words
which he understands not, but he is crazed in his intellectuals, and
knows not the way of the spirit in the soul. Let me hear one speak
concerning the work of grace, the actings of faith, the drawings of
the spirit; whose eyes have been opened, as Baalam said of himself, in
another case, one who hath had an internal sense and feeling of these
things within himself, for he is best able to unfold such hidden
mysteries.

But let us cease from man, for wherein is he to be accounted of? The
day-dawning and the day-star arising in our hearts, will give us
better light into that more sure word, of the prophets and apostles,
than all the learned school-men, or voluminous commentators, who have
not ploughed with God’s heifer.

Fourthly, if knowledge of Christian doctrine must be received by
spiritual anointing, then to be instructed in the letter of the
Scriptures, is not enough to make a Christian. A man may by natural
understanding, exercised upon the letter of the Bible, attain to very
great orthodoxy in Articles of Faith, and several points of religion,
for that which is true in divinity, is true also in reason; but
notwithstanding all this literal knowledge, his soul may be like
Pharaoh’s lean kine, a starved and ill-favoured soul.

The generality of men in the world are exceedingly mistaken in this
business; for they have thought it to be reformation enough, if they
might but purge their Articles of Faith, and set forth in print that
which might vindicate the truth of their opinions and ways from the
prejudice that they lie under in the world, whereas in the midst of
such reformation, men shall be as carnal and devilish as they were
before. They shall inwardly be as full of pride, and covetousness, of
envy and malice, of hatred and revenge as ever, and they shall have
leave to study mischief, and conceive evil will against their
neighbour, notwithstanding all the elaborate niceness of a reformed
system.

Brethren, we must not only reform our books, though that be very good,
but we must reform our hearts, and our lives; the power of this
anointing must eat out the proud flesh of our distempered hearts, and
quicken us also into a more pure and refined spirit. Professors do
think they attain to a great measure of heavenly skill, if they are
but so well read in the Bible, as to turn from one Scripture to
another, and compare one place with another, whereby they may more
strongly back that opinion which they would defend, whereas all this
while, the Scripture is a thing without them, and the mind of God is
in their Bibles, not in their hearts, but the true Christian hath the
word of God transcribed into himself, and can say in his measure, as
Jesus Christ did, I delight to do thy will, O my God, Yea, thy law is
within my heart.

Eunapius, in the Life of Porphyry, speaking of his Master Longinus
saith, he was such an excellent scholar, that he was a living library,
a walking study; all his books were so well digested, and their
notions concocted in his mind, that he did (as it were) give life and
motion to his books, in a requital for that learning which he had
received from them.

He is a Christian to purpose, who hath the Bible transpirited into his
mind, who hath digested the sense of Scripture into practice and vital
blood. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew who is one
inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, whose
praise is not of men but of God.

Fifthly, doth the Apostle bring in this anointing of the spirit, as
that which secures holy men from Antichristian impostures, then here
may we see the ground of those great apostasies that are abroad. Do we
at any time see some eminent professor come tumbling down like Lucifer
from the height of his profession, and immersed himself in the dung of
worldly wickedness? Let us know, the reason is, because he had no root
in himself. They went out from us; saith our Apostle, for they were
not of us, They were *leviter tincti, sed non penitus imbuti*, they
have had perhaps some sudden and transient taste of sweetness in the
ways of God, but never did feed upon them with savour, nor digest
them. They went out from us, that it might be manifest that they were
not all of us.

There be some men in the world, who have much of that which we call
light in their understandings, but have no grace nor honesty in their
hearts, and it is no wonder if they turn away from the truth in a time
of temptation, and day of trial; it is the good ground that bringeth
forth fruit, and it is the honest heart that stands in a tempest,
being well bottomed and grounded upon a Rock. He that is hurried into
any profession, by the impulse of his worldly affections, can not be
settled and established in that profession, but must turn about when
those affections give the word. He is like a ship whose sails are open
to every gale of wind, but hath neither ballast nor rudder to keep it
steady in its motion. Many people think themselves so good
Protestants, that they should never turn Papists; who yet, I fear,
would fall from their own steadfastness into the error of the wicked;
and casting off the Protestant Articles, would easily entertain for
faith the dogmata of Rome; the reason whereof is that their souls are
not converted to that faith which they profess.

To an unregenerate man who gives up himself to licentiousness, all
religion is alike, for religion doth oblige and command the soul into
a diligent obedience to some rule, but such an unmortified heart
cannot endure the beautiful bands of a religious law. But where the
Gospel of Christ cometh, as it did to the Thessalonians, not in word
only, but in power and much full assurance, where the word of truth is
made manifest in men’s consciences, and becometh an engrafted word,
there we may be persuaded with the Apostle, that he who hath begun a
good work, will perfect it unto the coming of Christ.

This I must confess, that men by the improvement of their natural
understandings, and by observing the dictates of natural conscience,
may reform some external enormities and scandalous vices of their
lives, and proceed further in profession upon account of some worldly
considerations, but from all this reformation, though improved and
carried on very high, they may again revolt, and apostatize, because
the principles thereof were external and political, not internal and
genuine: Such men as these are not like Timothy, whom Paul calleth his
natural son in the faith, they are not natural, but artificial
Christians. But he that is, not in appearance only, but in truth also,
transformed into the image of Christ hath the seed of God remaining in
him, and eternal life implanted, which shall never wither. He shall
never drown himself in sensuality, or fall away from the holiness of a
godly life, into the filth and baseness of a degenerate spirit.

The Apostle saith, *oportet esse haereses,* there must be heresies,
that they which are approved may be made manifest. The understanding
merchant knows which is the pearl of price, when one that is ignorant
may be cheated with a counterfeit. This is the excellency and glory of
a spirit taught of God, that when others fall away from the truth of
doctrine and integrity of life, that will still adhere and cleave unto
him; when the whole world shall lie in wickedness, that will preserve
it self unspotted and blameless, unto the coming of Christ. Hence it
was that the martyrs of old, though they could not dispute, yet they
could die for Christ. He that is alive in God, shall not be religious
only when he hath the times with him, for that is easy, the dead fish
can swim down the stream; but when the wickedness of the times, and
places where he lives draweth other men into a dissolute looseness, he
shall stand like mount Zion, and never be removed.

Sixthly, if the spirit of Christ be such a teaching spirit, whereby we
know him aright, then it concerns every regenerate soul to deal kindly
with that spirit. Oh! be very tender of the good spirit of Jesus
Christ. I mean not only that gentle spirit, which sometimes breathes
upon the garden of our souls, and makes the spices thereof flow out
and give their scent, but that spirit of Christ also which is united
unto and implanted in our spirits, that new creature which is formed
within us. Oh! take heed of grieving, tempting or quenching this
spirit; *spiritus sanctus est res delicata*, the divine spirit is a
very tender thing. Let none dare to cast water upon it, whereby to
cool or damp it, but let it act according to its own natural tendency.

It was the great request of David’s heart in Psalm 51:11, cast me not
away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. O Lord,
whatsoever thou takest away, do not take this away: This spirit is
that which puts me upon observance of thy will, and doth many times
recover and bring me back again, when I have forgotten my self and
thee. Christians! Would you know what you are most of all beholding to
in the world? It is the good spirit and life of Jesus Christ. This is
the life of your lives, and the soul of your souls; without this
spirit you were but as other men, yea, you were unto God but as dead
carcasses and stinking carrions.

Now if this spirit be our life, and if by this men live, Oh! then be
kind and tender towards it; take heed least by any means you do offend
it. Then doth a soul deal harshly and unkindly with this spirit, when
it opposeth, resisteth and endeavoureth to stifle the motions of it,
when the will of Christ in the soul is gainsaid. Take heed,
Christians, that you be not so rude as to offer violence, and to force
this holy spirit; when that moves you towards God, do not you turn
away from God. What the Apostle begs for patience, I would beg for the
spirit of Christ. Let the nature, spirit, and life of Christ have its
perfect work in you, let it act according to its own freedom and
latitude. The Holy Ghost that dwells in you, doth advise you not only
to be Christians, *pro hic et nunc*, by fits and starts, so as may
serve your own turns, but also to be enduring, and universal
Christians. This divine spirit is not satisfied if you be only moved
by it in your public assemblies, unless you be moved by it also in
your closets, your shops, and in all your relations: for the sphere of
the new creature, is, a sober, righteous, and godly life. Where this
Holy Spirit dwells, it will prompt the soul to something which is
transcendent, and above the strain of vulgar spirits.

Now suppose I should propound to this great Assembly the question that
Christ propounded to his disciples in Matthew 5. What singular thing
do you more than others? Yea, let me but propound it to those who are
called the holy ones of the Most High, wherein do you excel the
spirits of worldly men? What is there that may show you to be anointed
with this divine spirit? Are you not as proud, as covetous, as vain in
your conversations, as other men? Oh! then let me commend this unto
you, as seasonable and wholesome counsel, take heed how you use the
spirit of Christ which dwelleth in you, and suffer it to act like it
self.

Seventhly, and lastly, if holy souls know heavenly things by virtue of
the anointing from the holy one, which teacheth so sweetly and
clearly, then from hence we may guess at the glory of heaven. We may
stand upon this truth as Moses did upon the top of Pisgah, and from
thence view the land of promise.

If the dignity of Christian in this world, be such as to have his mind
enlightened with the pure spirit of Christ, whereby he knoweth the
mind of God with infallible certainty, then what shall his glory be in
the world to come? The Scriptures call that spirit which believers
receive here the seal, the earnest and first-fruits of that which they
shall receive hereafter. And although this present knowledge which
they have of heavenly truths, doth so far exceed and transcend all the
literal knowledge of other men; yet the Apostle accounts it dark and
enigmatical in comparison of that knowledge which he expects at the
revelation of Jesus Christ; for in this mixture of flesh and spirit
the soul doth use glasses and perspectives, but then it shall see,
face to face, then shall it know even as it is known.

Oh! What infinite serenity and surpassing brightness shall then
encompass holy souls, when they shall see all truth in him who is
truth itself ? Here we may often meet with vexations and disputes from
contentious spirits, but in heaven there shall be *altum silentium*, a
deep silence and everlasting rest, where our souls shall wade into a
sea of light and enter into a vast eternity of truth. There shall be
no spots, nor blemishes, no doubts nor scruples arising in our
spirits, for it shall be all day, even a day without clouds. We shall
never more be troubled with the importunity of busy arguments, there
shall be no room for the disputer of this world, but the immaculate
Lamb our Lord Jesus shall be the light of that new Jerusalem, and he
shall enlighten our souls with his own light and glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

